Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology
and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine.
This podcast is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information
about science and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Roca.
Roca makes sunglasses and eyeglasses,
and I'm delighted that they're a partner
and a sponsor for the podcast.
As some of you may already know,
I've spent two decades or more studying the visual system,
how we see vision is absolutely the most important sense
by which humans navigate the world and survive,
and our eyes as two pieces of our brain
do many other important things as well.
So taking good care of our eyesight is essential.
Founded by two All-American swimmers from Stanford,
Roca was born out of an obsession for performance.
They've carefully put science and purpose
behind their design choices,
and they've built absolutely terrific products as a result.
The glasses are amazing.
I love them because they look great,
they are super comfortable,
and the optical clarity is incredible.
They filter out sunlight in a way
that still allows you to see contrast and shadows
the way you need to.
For me, one of the things that's really irritating
is if I have a pair of sunglasses
that don't allow me to see all the things I want to see.
And with Roca glasses, I get incredible contrast,
but then I can also relax and be outdoors in bright light.
And as the amount of light changes with cloud cover
and things of that sort,
my ability to see my surroundings
is still really sharp and really clear.
And that only comes from really understanding
how the visual system works
and how it adjusts to contrast and adaptation
and all these different things.
They really understand the science,
and that went into the design of these glasses.
And as many of you know,
sunlight and the viewing of light
is also very important for setting circadian rhythms.
So that's also been incorporated
into the design and science behind these glasses.
I do wear readers.
I don't often wear them during the podcast,
but I have to wear reading glasses at night.
So I use their readers
and I own a pair of their sunglasses,
and I'm delighted with them.
If you'd like to check out Roca glasses,
you can go to roca.com, that's R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code Huberman
to save 20% off your first order.
That's R-O-K-A.com, enter the code Huberman at checkout
to get 20% off your first order.
Today's podcast is also brought to you by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and reach your health goals.
I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the important things
that are vital to our immediate and long-term health
can only be detected in a good quality blood test.
The problem with blood tests is that most blood tests,
you get a lot of information back about levels
that are too high or too low of this thing
or the other thing, but making sense of that
and what to do with that information is very challenging.
Even if you have a really attentive physician,
oftentimes it's mysterious
as to what to do with all this data.
With Inside Tracker, they make it very easy to understand
what all the metabolic factors, hormone factors, et cetera,
mean for you and what to do about those markers.
So they offer you directives
in terms of nutrition, supplementation,
as well as lifestyle factors like exercise, sleep, et cetera,
that can allow you to take control of those numbers
and bring them into the ranges that are best for you
and your long-term health.
Another feature of Inside Tracker that's great
is their inner age test.
This test shows you what your biological age
and how it compares to your chronological age,
which I can only imagine most everybody, including me,
are extremely interested in, how long am I likely to live?
How old am I really in terms of my biology?
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can visit insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I've been using Athletic Greens since 2012
and so I'm delighted that they're sponsoring the podcast.
With Athletic Greens, you get a ton of factors
that are good for you,
mixed into this one really good tasting drink.
I like to mix mine with water
and a little bit of lemon juice,
and I drink that once or twice a day,
typically once early in the day,
and sometimes also in the afternoon or even evening.
I'm able to sleep after drinking in the evening just fine.
The reason I've been using Athletic Greens for so long
that I continue to use Athletic Greens is that,
one, I feel better when I take it, I just do.
Psychologically, physically, I feel better,
but also it covers all my bases of the things that I need
for my general health.
It's sort of a foundational supplement,
as I like to call it.
In fact, when people ask me, what should I take?
If I were to recommend just one supplement that people take,
it would be Athletic Greens.
With Athletic Greens, you get support for your gut,
which is important because the gut microbiome
is important for the gut brain access,
for mood, metabolism, hormones, et cetera.
There are so many data that support that statement.
As well, there are many factors in Athletic Greens
that support general health, metabolism, endocrine factors,
immunity, et cetera.
So with Athletic Greens, I drink it once or twice a day,
and I know that I've got all that covered.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman.
And if you do that, you can claim a special offer.
They'll send you five free travel packs
plus a year supply, excuse me, of vitamin D3 and K2.
So you get the five free travel packs
and a year supply of D3.
If you go to athleticgreens.com slash Huberman,
you can claim that special offer.
For the last month, four episodes to be exact,
we've been discussing physical performance
and skill learning.
We've talked about how to learn skills faster,
whether or not those are skills for athletic performance,
dance, music, things of that sort.
We've also talked about how to gain strength
and how to lose fat faster by leveraging the nervous system.
Things like shiver and non-shiver,
non-exercise activity-induced thermogenesis.
We talked about how neurons can actually
trigger accelerated fat loss.
We talked about hypertrophy, also called muscle growth.
And we covered everything from sets and reps, protocols,
how long to stay in a cold ice bath, when to get out,
how to keep shivering.
We've covered a lot of tools and a lot of science.
So if you're interested in those things
and you even perhaps want to learn a little bit
about how we make energy, ATP, from carbohydrates
or from fats, it's all covered in the previous four episodes.
This was going to be the time
that we move to a new topic entirely,
but we are going to do one more episode
in this series on physical performance
for the simple reason that you asked many questions
about something that's vitally important,
both for physical performance
and long-term and short-term health, and that's endurance.
And so today we are going to talk about endurance.
Now, if you're a strength athlete
or you're not interested in endurance,
don't depart just yet,
because it turns out that there are ways to train endurance
that are very different
than I would have previously imagined.
If you only think about long runs, long swims,
marathons, half marathons, 10Ks, 5Ks,
and that sort of thing puts you to sleep,
kind of like Costello is snoring
in the background right now.
He's not a long distance endurance athlete, that's for sure.
If you're interested in those things,
or if you are averse to those things,
I encourage you to continue listening,
because we are going to talk about a little bit of science
and then some specific protocols
that really define what endurance is,
the four types of endurance,
and ways to train those in concert
with the other things that you might be doing,
like weight training or skill training or yoga.
And if you are an endurance athlete,
we are going to cover a lot of tools and science
that I'm certain will also help enhance your training
and performance in races or even just recreationally.
The topic of endurance,
I think has been badly misrepresented, frankly, online.
And when you start digging into the science
and you start talking to real experts in this area,
what you discover, what I've discovered,
is that it's an incredibly interesting area
because it teaches us so much
about how our body and our brain use fuels
and how we can control which fuels
are used by our body and brain.
So today we will talk about the four kinds of endurance.
We will also cover the topic of hydration,
which might sound incredibly boring,
like, okay, just drink more water.
But it's really interesting
because not only is hydration
a limiting factor on performance,
but there is a right way to hydrate
and there is a wrong way to hydrate.
There actually is a formula that I'll teach you
to know how much water to be drinking,
depending on your activity levels.
And if that sounds like a simple thing,
like, oh, just tap off water until your urine runs clear,
that's actually the wrong advice.
It turns out that if you don't hydrate properly,
you can see 20 to 30% reductions in performance,
whether or not that's strength,
whether or not that's increasing hypertrophy,
whether or not that's running, swimming,
even mental performance.
So even if you're not an athlete
or a recreational athlete at all,
I encourage you to stay tuned for the part about hydration.
So we're going to cover as usual a little bit of science,
and then we're going to dive right into protocols
that you can apply if you like,
and if you deem those correct and safe for you.
Before we dive into all that,
I want to make an important announcement,
which is all the episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast
are now housed on a single website,
which is hubermanlab.com.
If you go to hubermanlab.com,
you can find all the episodes in YouTube, Apple,
and Spotify format with links there.
The website is also searchable.
So if you go into the little search function,
which you'll find very easily,
and you put in, for instance, creatine or sleep
or ice bath or sauna,
it will take you to the specific episodes
that contain that information.
And in addition, if you go to the website, hubermanlab.com,
you have the opportunity to sign up
for what we call the Huberman Lab Neural Network.
The Huberman Lab Neural Network is a zero cost resource
where once a month, perhaps more often,
you'll receive a email newsletter,
and that newsletter will contain specific protocols,
announcements, attachments of PDFs
and things of that sort of protocols, tools,
and science from the podcast.
We will also make any announcements about live lectures,
which at some point I'll probably start doing
in various cities in the US
and probably around the world as well,
as well as other things
that I think would be really useful to you,
all of course at zero cost.
So that's hubermanlab.com.
Sign up for the neural network newsletter.
You can find that in the menu tab
or it might pop up when you get there.
And I hope you will join.
And as a final announcement,
if you're not already following us on Instagram,
you can go to Huberman Lab on Instagram.
And if you do that, I often make announcements
and release protocols and links to protocols
and things there as well.
I briefly want to touch on something
from the previous episode,
which is that if you are somebody
that is trying to increase muscle strength and or size,
or if you're simply somebody
who doesn't want to increase muscle strength and size,
and you just want to maintain the musculature that you have,
it's vital that you perform at least five sets
of resistance training per muscle per week.
If we don't do that, we lose muscle over time.
And that is one reason among many
to have a regular resistance training protocol.
Nobody wants to start resembling a folded over envelope
or a melted candle.
No one wants to have challenges getting up out of a chair
or off the ground.
Maintaining musculature is vital,
not just to our immediate health,
but to our long-term health trajectory.
So I just want to emphasize that point.
If you're curious about the sets, the reps,
how close to failure to go or not go,
whether or not you should be
doing your cardiovascular training
before or after your weight training,
all of that is in the previous episode,
right down to the details.
And I like to think it made simple for you to understand.
But I do strongly believe that resistance training,
whether or not it's with body weight or bands or weights,
or simply lifting rocks in the yard or logs in the yard,
is vital for our systemic physiology
and our overall health.
And that includes our brain health.
And I described the reasons for that
and the mechanisms in the previous episode.
Today, I'd like to talk about endurance
and how to build endurance and how to use endurance
for the health of your entire body.
Endurance, as the name suggests,
is our ability to engage in continuous bouts of exercise
or continuous movement or continuous effort of any kind.
And I do believe that our ability to engage in activities
that we call endurance training
or physical endurance activities
do have carry over to mental performance
of things that require long-term effort.
I'll touch on that at the end
and why there's reason to believe
that there's a biological crossover
between those two things.
I don't think it's simply the case
that if you train yourself to be a strength
and speed athlete and to do short bouts of exercise,
they're very intense,
that you can only do mental work
that's of short bouts and very intense.
But it is clear that cardiovascular exercise,
exercise where you're getting your heart rate up
continuously for a period of time
and endurance exercise,
we will define what that is in a moment,
is vital for tapping into and enhancing various aspects
of our biology in the body and in the brain
such that our brain can perform work
for longer periods of time,
focused work, learning, et cetera.
So I want to dive into the topic of endurance
and I want to just begin by addressing something
that's vital to any kind of effort,
whether or not it's mental effort or physical effort.
So as always a little bit of science
and then we'll get right into protocols.
So the key thing to understand
about energy production in the body,
meaning your ability to think,
your ability to talk,
your ability to walk,
your ability to run,
is this thing that we call ATP.
ATP and mitochondria,
which are just little what we call organelles within cells,
these little factories that make energy, if you will,
ATP is required for anything that requires energy,
for anything that you do that requires effort.
And there are different ways to get ATP.
And we have been gifted as a species
with the ability to convert lots of things into ATP.
We can convert carbohydrates,
literally the kinds of carbohydrates.
You eat a bagel, you eat a piece of pizza.
Pizza usually has dough and it has cheese
and some other things.
Costello here is me talking about pizza.
Costello loves pizza by the way.
Eating a piece of pizza,
it gets converted into various things,
fatty acids from the fats,
glucose from the bread,
and those things get converted into ATP within cells
through things like glycolysis,
things like lipolysis.
I talked about this in previous episodes.
So our muscles and our neurons
use different fuel sources to generate ATP.
The ones that are used first
for short bouts of intense activity
are things like phosphocreatine.
If you've only heard about creatine as a supplement,
well, phosphocreatine actually exists on our muscles.
And that's why people take creatine.
You can load your muscles with more creatine.
And excuse me, phosphocreatine is great
for short, intense bouts of effort.
So when you're really pushing hard on something physical,
let's say you see a car on the side of the road
and that car is stalled and the person says,
hey, can you help me push my car?
And you start to push,
that's going to be phosphocreatine
is going to be your main fuel source.
Then you start to tap into things like glucose,
which is literally just carbohydrate,
it's just sugar that's in your blood.
And then if you keep pushing on that car,
you keep in engaging in a particular effort
or you keep studying or you keep listening to this podcast,
you start to tap into other fuel sources
like glycogen from your liver,
which is just, it's like a little pack,
just like you might've packed a sandwich
or something for work.
You have a little pack of glycogen in your liver
that you can rely on.
And you have fats stored in adipose tissue.
Even if you have very, very low body fat percentage,
like you're one of these people
who has like 3% or 5% body fat,
really thin skin, very little body fat,
you can extract lipids, fatty acids from that body fat.
It's like a storage pack.
It is a storage pack for energy
that can be converted to ATP.
So without going into any more detail,
when I say today energy, or I say ATP,
just remember that regardless of your diet,
regardless of your nutritional plan,
your body has the capacity to use creatine,
glucose, glycogen, lipids,
and if you're ketogenic, ketones.
We'll talk about ketosis in order to generate fuel energy.
Now, the other crucial point
is that in order to complete that process
of taking these fuels and converting them into energy,
most of the time you need oxygen.
You need air basically in your system.
Now, it's not actual air.
You need oxygen molecules in your system,
comes in through your mouth and your nose,
goes to your lungs and distributes via the bloodstream.
Oxygen is not a fuel,
but like a fire that has no oxygen,
you can't actually burn the logs,
but when you blow a lot of oxygen onto a fire,
basically onto logs with a flame there,
then basically it will take fire, it will burn.
Oxygen allows you to burn fuel.
So today we are going to ask the critical questions.
What allows us to perform?
What allows us to continue effort for long periods of time?
And that effort could be a run, it could be a swim,
it could be studying,
it could be anything that extends over a long period of time.
Well, you're going to need energy
and you're going to need oxygen.
But the way to answer a question,
like what allows us to endure, right?
Endurance, what allows us to keep going?
Well, we think of things like willpower,
but what's willpower?
Willpower is neurons, it's neurons in our brain.
We have this thing called the central governor,
which decides whether or not we should or could continue
or whether or not we should stop,
whether or not we should quit, okay?
So whether or not you're somebody who has a lot
of what we would call resilience and endurance,
or whether or not you're somebody who taps out early
and quits early or can't handle frustration,
that has to do with your fuel utilization
in specific neurons.
So we have to ask the question,
what is the limiting factor on performance, right?
So instead of saying, what allows us to endure,
we should say, what prevents us from enduring?
What prevents us from moving forward?
What are the factors that say, you know what?
No more, I'm not going to continue this run.
Or you know what?
I've had a really long, hard day,
or maybe I've had an easy day or I'm feeling lazy,
I just don't even really feel like getting up and moving.
So what we're going to talk about today
actually gets right down to the heart of motivation
and fuel use, motivation and fuel allocation.
And we are going to talk about specific training protocols
that you can follow that have carry over
between the bodily systems of running, swimming, et cetera,
and the way that your brain works.
So let's talk about endurance by asking first,
what are the limiting factors on endurance?
What stops us?
Because in addressing that and answering that,
we will understand what allows us to get into effort
and to continue effort.
There are five main categories of things
that allow us to engage in effort.
And they are neurons, nerves, muscle, muscle,
blood, things in our blood, our heart, and our lungs.
Now, I don't want to completely write off things
like the immune system and other systems of the body,
but nerve, muscle, blood, heart, and lungs
are the five that I want to focus on today
because that's where most of the data are.
As we go forward into this,
I want to acknowledge Dr. Andy Galpin,
who, as with the last episode,
has been tremendously helpful and informative
in terms of the exercise physiology.
He's a true expert.
He has a laboratory.
He's a full professor who does work on muscle biopsy,
who understands the science,
but who also works with athletes
and works with recreational athletes,
professional athletes,
really understands at a variety of levels
how all these systems work.
He's the person I consulted with about today's episode,
although I did access other literature as well.
And I'm going to mention a key review
for any of you aficionados
who really want to get down into the weeds.
But I encourage you, if you want more detail,
to check out Dr. Andy Galpin's YouTube page.
I think he's also on Twitter.
He's definitely on Instagram.
His content is excellent, and he really understands.
I have learned, and I really believe,
that an intellectual is somebody who understands a topic
at multiple levels of specificity of detail
and can communicate that.
And Andy is a true intellectual
of muscle physiology and performance.
And if you hear the word intellectual
and you kind of back up and cringe from that,
understand that he's also a practitioner.
So thank you, Andrew Galpin, Andy Galpin,
for your support in these episodes.
And we hope to have you as a guest on the podcast soon.
So nerve, muscle, blood, heart, and lungs.
Let's talk about neurons and how they work, okay?
But I want to tell you about an experiment
that's going to make it very clear
why quitting is a mental thing, not a physical thing.
So why do we quit?
Well, an experiment was done a couple of years ago
and was published in the journal Cell,
Cell Press Journal, excellent journal,
showing that there is a class of neurons
in our brainstem, in the back of our brain,
that if they shut off, we quit.
Now, these neurons release epinephrine.
Epinephrine is adrenaline.
And anytime we are engaged in effort of any kind,
we are releasing epinephrine.
Anytime we're awake, really,
we are releasing epinephrine into our brain.
In fact, this little group of neurons
in the back of our brain,
it's called the locus coeruleus, if you like,
is churning out epinephrine all the time.
But if something stresses us out, it churns out more,
and then it acts as kind of an alertness signal
for the whole brain.
We also, of course,
have adrenaline epinephrine released in our body,
which makes our body ready for things.
So think about epinephrine as a readiness signal.
And when we are engaged in effort,
this readiness signal is being churned into our brain.
When we're relaxed and we're falling asleep,
epinephrine levels are low, okay?
So they did a really interesting experiment
where they had subjects engage in bouts of effort
of trying to move forward toward a goal,
but they manipulated the visual environment
with these stripes,
kind of like fences passing on both sides of them.
And by doing that, they could trick subjects
into thinking that their effort
was either allowing them to move forward, right?
Because these rungs on the fence were moving past,
or that their effort was futile,
that they were no longer moving forward
because they would make the rungs move slowly
even though the subjects were making a lot of effort
to move forward, okay?
So this is analogous or similar to being on a treadmill
and you're trying to walk on this treadmill
and you just can't move the conveyor, right?
Or you're in virtual reality
and you're putting a ton of effort,
but it seems like you're moving excruciatingly slow.
I had this experience recently in real life.
I was doing a swim in the Pacific.
I was trying to go south and I was swimming
and I was caught in a current,
not the kind that pulls you out to ocean.
And I kept looking to my left
and I saw this hotel on the shoreline.
And then I was swimming and swimming
and swimming and swimming.
And 20 minutes later, I looked to my left
and the hotel is still exactly where it was before,
which meant that I wasn't moving.
It felt futile.
Eventually, either the current changed or something changed
and I eventually swam past the hotel,
got back on the beach and eventually drove home.
That's essentially what they did in this experiment.
But what they found was these neurons
that release epinephrine,
there's another cell type called glia,
which actually means glue in Latin,
that is paying attention to how much epinephrine
is being released.
And at some point, the system reaches a threshold.
It reaches this threshold and it shuts off
the release of more epinephrine.
It's like, I quit, that's it, no more effort signal.
If they could extend the time
before those glia said, ah, enough,
if they could release more adrenaline into the system,
then subjects would keep going.
So our desire to continue or put differently,
our willingness to continue and our desire to quit
is mediated by events between our two ears.
Now that doesn't mean that the body's not involved,
but it means that neurons are critically important.
So we have two categories of neurons that are important.
The ones in our head that tell us get up and go out
and take that run and the ones that allow us,
encourage us to continue that run
and we have neurons that shut things off and say no more.
And we of course have the neurons
that connect to our muscles and control our muscles.
But the reason we quit is rarely because our body quits,
our mind quits.
Now, I would never want to encourage people
to drive themselves to the point of injury.
That's not going to be good for anybody,
but it is good to know that it's neural.
Our ability to persist is neural.
So when people say, is it, I hear that sports
or effort or fighting, or it's 90% mental, 10% physical,
that whole discussion about how much is mental,
how much is physical is absolutely silly.
It just proves that there's no knowledge
of the underlying biology behind that statement.
It's neither mental nor physical.
Everything is physical.
Everything is neurons.
Your thinking is the responsibility of chemicals
and electrical signals in your head.
So it's not 90% mental, 10% physical.
It's not 50, 50.
It's not 70, 30.
It's 100% nervous system.
It's neurons, okay?
So when people say mental or physical,
understand it's 100% neural.
And I'd love for the, how much of it is mental
and how much is physical to just disappear.
That argument means nothing and it's not actionable.
Now, what do nerves need in order to continue to fire?
What do you need in order to get neurons to say,
I will persist?
Well, they need glucose.
Unless you're a keto and ketogenic adapted,
you need carbohydrate is glucose.
That's what neurons run on.
And you need electrolytes.
Neurons have what's called a sodium potassium pump,
blah, blah, blah.
They generate electricity.
We could go into all this.
I will probably do an entire lecture
about the action potential,
but basically in order to get nerve cells to fire,
to contract muscle, to say, I'm going to continue,
you need sufficient sodium salt
because the action potential,
the actual firing of neurons is driven
by sodium entering the cell, rushing into the cell.
And then there's a removal of potassium.
And then there's a kind of resetting of those levels
by something called the sodium potassium pump
and the sodium potassium pump
and sodium and action potentials.
Even if you don't know anything about that is ATP dependent.
It requires energy.
So you need energy in order to get neurons to fire.
And it is pH dependent.
It depends on the conditions or the environment
within the brain being of a certain pH or acidity.
pH is about how acid or how basic the environment is.
And we will talk a little bit about pH in simple terms
that you can understand.
So nerves need salt, they need potassium,
and it turns out they need magnesium
and you need glucose and carbohydrates
in order to power those neurons
unless you are running on ketones.
And to run on ketones,
you have to make sure that you're fully keto adapted.
I will talk about adding in ketones
on top of carbohydrate at the end of the episode.
Okay, so that's how nerves work.
You need carbohydrate, you need sodium, potassium,
and magnesium in order to drive the brain.
Muscle, muscle is going to engage and generate energy first
by using this phosphocreatine system.
High bouts of effort, really intense effort,
short-lived seconds to minutes,
but probably more like seconds
is going to be this phosphocreatine,
literally a fuel source in the muscle
that you're going to burn,
just like you would logs on a fire.
And glycogen, which is stored carbohydrate in the muscle,
that also can be burned,
just like logs on a fire to generate energy.
So let me make this crystal clear.
If you move your wrist towards your shoulder
and contract your bicep really hard,
muscle fibers are burning up their own carbohydrate.
They're converting that into ATP
in order to generate that energy, okay?
And pH is important and temperature is important.
In the episode on supercharge, your physical performance,
I talked all about how by using cooling,
specifically of the palms or the bottoms of the feet
or the cheeks of the face using particular methods,
you can adjust the temperature of the body and of muscle
in a way that allows you to do more work,
to do more reps, to run further,
to keep going and to persist.
And that's because if temperature is too low or too high,
then ATP is not going to be available
because of this whole thing
called the pyruvate kinase pathway
and the temperature dependence of pyruvate kinase.
Check out that episode if you want to learn more about that,
but temperature is important and pH is also important.
So we've got nerve, muscle,
and then there's stuff in our blood
that's available as an energy source.
And in blood, we've got glucose,
so literally blood sugar that's floating around.
So let's say you have fasted for three days,
your blood glucose is going to be very low,
so that's not going to be a great fuel source,
but you will start to liberate fats from your adipose tissue
from your fat, fatty acids will start to mobilize
into the bloodstream and you can burn those for energy
and oxygen in your blood.
When you inhale, you're bringing oxygen into your blood.
So these are all fuel sources in your neurons,
in your muscle, in your blood,
in your various tissues that are providing the opportunity
to give effort, to induce effort,
whether or not it's a run or a swim or writing or talking.
Now, there are some other factors that are important
and those are the heart, which is going to move blood.
So the more that the heart can move blood and oxygen,
well, the more fuel that's going to be available
for you to engage in muscular effort and thinking effort.
So your heart is vitally important
to your muscle's ability to work
and your brain's ability to work.
And as I've mentioned, oxygen a few times,
it should be obvious then that the lungs are very important.
You need to bring oxygen in
and distribute it to all these tissues
because oxygen is critical
for the conversion of carbohydrates
and the conversion of fats.
And we could get into the discussion
about whether or not oxygen is important
for ketogenic metabolism, but you need oxygen there.
You need to breathe and you need to breathe properly.
So I just covered what would normally be
about four lectures of energy consumption
and energy utilization.
I didn't go into much detail at all,
but what I want you to imagine
is that you've got these different cell types.
You've got neurons, you've got muscle.
They need to collaborate in order to generate effort
or to make the decision to do something
or to think hard or to run hard or to run far.
And then you've got fuel sources,
both in the neurons, in the muscle, in your blood,
and then the heart and lungs are going to help
distribute the oxygen and those fuels.
And of course you have that little energy pack
that we call the liver that will allow you
to pull out a little more carbohydrate
if you need it for work, okay?
So that's as much as I want to cover
about energy consumption
because that's a lot.
But what it tells you is that when you eat
and you use food as a fuel source,
that food can be broken down
and you can immediately burn the glucose
that's in your bloodstream,
or you can rely on some of the stored fuel in your liver,
or you can rely on stored fuel in the muscle,
so-called glycogen.
And there are a lot of different ways
that we can generate ATP.
So when we ask the question,
what's limiting for performance?
What is going to allow us to endure,
to engage in effort and endure long bouts of effort
or even moderately long bouts of effort?
We need to ask which of those things,
nerve, muscle, blood, heart, and lungs is limiting?
Or put differently,
we ask what should we be doing with our neurons?
What should we be doing with our muscles?
What should we be doing with our blood?
What should we be doing with our heart?
And what should we be doing with our lungs
that's going to allow us to build endurance
for mental and physical work
and to be able to go longer, further with more intensity?
That's the real question.
How can we do more work?
And the way we do that is with energy.
And the way to get energy to it is to buy those five things.
And so now we're going to talk about
how you can actually build different types of endurance
and what that does at the level of your blood,
your heart, your muscles, and your neurons.
So we're going to skip back and forth
between protocols, tools, and the underlying science.
So rather than heavy stack the science at the front end
and then just give you all the tools at the end,
we're going to talk about the protocols,
the four kinds of endurance and how to achieve them.
And we are going to talk about the underlying science
as we move through that.
If you would like a lot of detailed science,
I encourage you to check out a review
that we've linked in the show notes.
And the review is called
Adaptations to Endurance and Strength Training.
This is a review article with many excellent citations.
It's from Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Medicine.
The Cold Spring Harbor Press
is an excellent scientific press.
It's been the last 21 years doing summers
at Cold Spring Harbor teaching neuroscience,
but Cold Spring Harbor is involved
in all sorts of themes and topics
related to neuroscience and medicine.
This review by Hughes Elifesen,
Elifesen, that's the name, Elifesen and Barr,
B-A-A-R, Adaptations to Endurance and Strength Training,
is rich with citations.
It can be downloaded as a complete PDF.
There's no paywall and we will link to it.
And it gets really deep into all the signaling cascades,
the genetic changes within muscle
with high-intensity interval training,
short-term super high-intensity training, weight training.
So if you're a real nerd for this stuff
and you want to get right down into how PGC1 alpha,
P53 and pH 20 change the adaptation features
of muscle and gene regulation,
that is definitely the review for you.
If you're like most people
and you're not really interested in that level of detail,
no reason to pick up the review
unless you just want to check out
some of the figures and pictures.
But I do want to offer that as a resource.
It's been, in addition to discussions with Dr. Andy Galpin,
it's been a primary resource
for the content of this episode.
So let's talk about the four kinds of endurance
and how to achieve those.
I do believe that everybody should have
some sort of endurance practice,
regular endurance practice.
It's clear that it's vital
for the functioning of the body and the mind,
and there are clear longevity benefits.
There are a lot of reasons why that's true,
but the main one is that
if we have good energy utilization
in our musculature and in our blood,
in our vascular system,
and in our oxygenating system, our lungs,
the so-called cardiovascular system,
respiratory system, and musculature,
the body and brain function much better.
There are so many papers now,
so much data to support that.
So I do believe everyone
should either try to maintain the muscle that they have,
provided they've already gone through puberty
and development,
and they should be engaged in regular endurance exercise.
Now, for many people, they think endurance exercise,
that means what?
A hour long run, or I got to get on the Stairmaster,
or I have to treadmill for hours on end each week.
It turns out that's not the case.
There are four kinds of endurance,
and you can train specifically for any one of those,
and you can vary your training.
So let's talk about those four kinds of endurance,
because they're very interesting,
and they each have very different protocols
that you use in order to build and maximize them,
and now you'll understand what fuel sources they use
in order to build that thing we call endurance.
So first of all, we have muscular endurance.
Muscular endurance is the ability for our muscles
to perform work over time,
and our failure to continue to be able to perform that work
is going to be due to muscular fatigue,
not to cardiovascular fatigue.
So not because we're breathing too hard,
or we can't get enough blood to the muscles,
or because we quit mentally,
but because the muscles themselves give out, okay?
One good example of this would be
if you had to pick up a stone in the yard,
and that stone is not extremely heavy for you,
and you needed to do that anywhere from 50 to 100 times,
and you were picking it up and putting it down,
and picking it up and putting it down,
and picking up and putting it down,
at some point, your muscles will fatigue.
They will fail to endure.
Muscular endurance is incredibly useful
for a variety of physical pursuits,
and we will talk about the mental pursuits
that it supports as well.
In terms of physical pursuits,
the ability for a given muscle to perform repeated work
is going to improve your golf swing.
It's going to improve your tennis swing.
It's going to improve your posture,
your ability to dance,
your ability to repeatedly engage in an activity
that requires effort in a way that's very different
from the kind of endurance that you will build
simply by increasing your cardiovascular fitness,
your ability to generate kind of easy repetition.
So let's talk about muscular endurance and what it is.
Muscular endurance is going to be something
that you can perform for anywhere from 12 to 25,
or even up to 100 repetitions.
And that's actually how, if you like,
you would train muscular endurance.
And I will give the specific protocol in a few moments.
So a good example is pushups, right?
If you were to get on the floor and start doing pushups,
even if you're somebody who has to do knees down pushups,
and you're doing your pushups,
eventually you won't be able to do any more pushups.
And that's not going to be
because you couldn't get enough oxygen into your system
or your heart wasn't pumping enough blood.
It's going to be because the muscles fail.
That's why.
So if you want to be able to do more pushups
or even more pullups,
muscular endurance is really what it's about.
It's actually no coincidence
that a lot of military bootcamp style training
is not done with weights.
It's done with things like pushups, pullups,
sit-ups, and running,
because what they're really building is muscular endurance,
the ability to perform work repeatedly over time
for a given set of muscles and neurons.
So what's a good protocol to build muscular endurance?
Let's just give that to you now
and explain some of the underlying science as it follows.
So a really good muscular endurance training protocol,
according to the scientific literature,
would be three to five sets
of anywhere from 12 to 100 repetitions.
That's a huge range.
Now, 12 to 25 repetitions
is going to be more reasonable for most people.
And the rest periods are going to be
anywhere from 30 to 180 seconds of rest.
So anywhere from half a minute to three minutes of rest.
So this might be five sets of pushups
done getting your maximum pushups.
For some people, that might be zero
and you have to do it knees down.
For some people, it might be 10 pushups.
For some people, it might be 25,
but you could go all the way up to 100.
Rest anywhere from 30 to 180 seconds
and then do your next set for a total of three to five sets.
So it doesn't actually sound like a ton of work.
The other thing you could do is something like a plank.
A plank position is actually a way
to build muscular endurance, not strength, okay?
I'm sure it could be used to develop strength,
but it's really about muscular endurance.
So you would do three to five sets of planks.
Those planks would probably,
even because you're not doing repetitions,
it's an isometric hold, as we say,
it's kind of static hold or a wall sit
would be another example.
And you would do that probably for a minute or two minutes,
take some rest of anywhere from 30 to 60 or 180 seconds
and then repeat.
So things like pushing a sled, pushups,
isometric planks, even pull-ups, those will all work.
And as with other forms of training,
you would want to do this until you approach failure
or actually fail and where you're unable
to perform another repetition,
that would mark the end of a set.
The one critical feature of building muscular endurance
is that it has no major eccentric loading component.
Now, I haven't talked much about eccentric
and concentric loading, but concentric loading
is when you are shortening the muscle typically
or lifting a weight and eccentric movements
are when you are lengthening a muscle typically
or lowering a weight.
So if you do a pull-up and you get your chin over the bar
or a chin-up, that's the concentric portion of the effort.
And then as you lower yourself, that's the eccentric portion.
Eccentric portion of resistance training of any kind,
whether or not it's for endurance or for strength
is one of the major causes of soreness.
Some people will be more susceptible to this,
excuse me, than others,
but it does create more damage in muscle fibers.
Muscular endurance and building muscular endurance
should not include any movements
that include major eccentric loads.
So if you're going to do push-ups,
doesn't mean that you want to drop,
smash your chest into the floor.
And by the way, your chest should touch the ground
on every push-up, that's a real push-up, okay?
It's not about breaking 90 with the elbows,
it's about pushing down till your chest touch the floor
and straightening out, that's a proper push-up.
And a pull-up is where you pull your chin above the bar.
Neither of those should include
a slow eccentric or lowering component
if you are using those to train muscular endurance,
the three to five sets of 12 to 25
and maybe even up to 100 repetitions
with 30 to 180 seconds of rest in between.
That means that jumping also is going to be a very poor tool
for building muscular endurance
because jumping has a slowing down component as you land.
So things like plyometrics or agility work
where you're moving from side to side
and you're decelerating, you're slowing yourself down a lot,
not going to be good for muscular endurance.
Terrific for cardiovascular training
and conditioning of other kinds
and skill training and agility and all that.
But if you want to build muscular endurance,
you want to make your muscles able
to do more work for longer,
it's going to be this three to five sets
of 12 to 100 reps, 30 to 180 seconds
of mainly concentric movement, okay?
Not a slow lowering phase or a heavy lowering phase.
So that might be kettlebell swings and things of that sort.
Isometrics, as I mentioned,
things like plank and wall sits will work.
Now what's interesting about this
is that it doesn't seem at all
like what people normally think of as endurance.
And yet it's been shown
in nice quality peer-reviewed studies,
several of which are cited in the review I mentioned earlier
that muscular endurance can improve our ability
to engage in long bouts of what we call long duration,
low intensity endurance work.
So this can support long runs,
it can support long swims and it can build also,
it can build postural strength and endurance simultaneously.
And that's mainly accomplished through isometric holds.
So things like planks are actually quite good
for building endurance of the spinal erector muscles
that provide posture of the abdominal muscles
that are helpful for posture, for being upright,
for the upper neck muscles and things of that sort.
These days, everyone seems to have text neck.
Everyone's basically staring at their toes all the time.
It has a default towards their toes.
So isometric holds can be very good
for building muscular endurance.
You can spot people, including yourself, perhaps,
with poor muscular endurance in the postural muscles
because anytime they stop moving,
they have to lean against a wall
or their hip will move to one side
or they're always leaned to one side.
I am guilty of this too.
Some of you have actually pointed out,
I like to think out of concern,
that I often am rubbing my lower back
and indeed I have some asymmetries in my postural muscles,
some of which are probably genetic
and some of which are probably just from excessive work
or something of that sort
that have my right shoulder sit lower than my left
and things of that sort.
If I wanted to improve those,
I could improve those by really focusing on symmetry
and isometric symmetry,
meaning holding my hands at equivalent positions in planks
and doing isometric holds
for building muscular endurance of the postural muscles.
But this can also be done with, as I mentioned,
kettlebell swings for the lower back and legs
and posterior chain.
So there are a number of different exercises
you could do this with,
but it should be compound exercises mainly.
It's rare for people to do
this kind of muscular endurance work
specifically for things like bicep curls or triceps.
And there aren't many activities
that really rely on isolation of those muscles repeatedly.
I'm sure there are some out there,
but it's kind of hard to imagine.
So you can do this with isometrics,
you can do this with more standard
non-isometric type movements,
but make sure there isn't a strong eccentric load.
So now let's talk about the science briefly
of why this works.
Well, that takes us back to this issue of fuel utilization
and what fails.
So if we were to say, okay, let's say you do a plank
and you're planking for, you know,
maybe you're able to plank for a minute
or two minutes or three minutes,
at some point you will fail.
You're not going to fail because the heart gives out.
You're not going to fail because you can't get enough oxygen
because you can breathe while you're doing that.
You're going to fail because of local muscular failure,
which means that as you do,
if you choose to do this protocol
of three to five sets, et cetera, et cetera,
to build muscular endurance,
mainly what you are going to be building
is you're going to be building
the ability of your mitochondria to use oxygen
to generate energy locally.
And that it's something called mitochondrial respiration,
respiration because of the involvement of oxygen.
And it's also going to be increasing the extent
to which the neurons control the muscles
and provide a stimulus for the muscles to contract.
But this is independent of power and strength, okay?
So even though the low sets like three to five sets
and the fact that you're doing repetitions
and you're going to failure,
even though it seems to resemble power and strength
and hypertrophy type training, it is distinctly different.
It's not going to generate strength, hypertrophy, and power.
It's going to mainly create this ability to endure,
to continually contract muscles or repeatedly contract
muscles, okay?
Continually if you're using isometric holds,
repeatedly, excuse me,
if you're using repetition type exercise
where there's a contraction and an extension of the muscle,
essentially concentric and an eccentric portion.
But remember that you want the eccentric portion
to be light and relatively fast,
not so fast that you injure yourself,
but certainly not deliberately slowed down.
It was recommended, I should say,
by Andy Galpin that you not use Olympic lifts for this
because once you get past eight or 12 or 25 repetitions,
especially form on those Olympic lifts is key
for not getting injured.
And while some people can perform those sorts of lifts
like snatches and deadlifts and cleans and jerks
and overhead presses, probably not a great idea
if the goal is to push the body to points of fatigue
because you do open yourself up to injury
unless you're very skilled at doing that
or you have a really good coach
who can help you guide through those lifts.
So that's one form of endurance,
which is muscular endurance.
It's mainly going to rely on neural energy,
so nerves and muscle.
And it's not going to rely quite so much
on what's available in your blood,
your heart or your lungs.
So now let's talk about the other extreme of endurance,
which is long duration endurance.
This is the type that people typically think about
when they think about endurance.
You're talking about a long run, a long swim,
a long bike ride.
Well, how long?
Well, anywhere from 12 minutes to several hours
or maybe even an entire day,
maybe eight or nine hours of hiking or running or biking.
Some people are actually doing those kinds
of really long events, marathons, for instance.
So anything longer than 12 minutes.
And this type of work builds on fuel utilization
in the muscles.
It builds on the activity of neurons in the brain
that are involved in what we call central pattern generators.
We talked about this in a previous episode
or several previous episodes.
These are groups of neurons that allow our body
to engage in regular rhythmic effort
without having to think about the movement too much.
So running and stepping or swimming,
if you already know how to swim or pedaling on a bike
or walking upstairs and hiking,
you're not thinking about right, left, right, left.
It's all carried out by central pattern generators.
This is going to be at less than 100%
of your maximum oxygen uptake, your VO2 max.
I'll talk about what VO2 max is,
but I just want to give a sense of what the protocol is
and the underlying science.
How many sets?
One.
Long duration effort is one set of 12 minutes or longer.
So you're not counting repetitions.
I sure hope that if you're going out on a 30 minute run
or even a 15 minute run, that you're not counting steps,
that you're not counting pedal strokes,
that you're not on the rower counting pulls on the rower.
I suppose you could,
but I think that would be pretty dreadful.
It seems like a poor utilization of cognitive brain space.
You're getting into regular repeated effort
and your ability to continue that effort
is going to be dependent mainly
on the efficiency of the movement,
on your ability to strike a balance
between the movement itself,
the generation of the muscular movements that are required
and fuel utilization across the different sources
of nerve, muscle, blood, heart, and lungs.
So let's ask the question, why would you fail on a long run?
Why would you quit?
Well, as you set out on that long run,
assuming you have some glycogen in your liver
and in your muscles, you're going to use that energy first,
even if it's very low intensity.
In case we're not talking about sprinting,
we're talking about heading out the door
or starting off on a marathon.
You're starting to, assuming you have some conditioning
or even if you don't, you're going to burn carbohydrate.
You're going to burn glucose in the bloodstream.
You're going to burn carbohydrate
as those muscles contract,
those what we call slow twitch muscles.
They're contracting, they start burning up fuel
to make ATP to continue to contract.
Your mind is going to use more or less energy
depending on how much willpower,
how much of a fight you have to get into with yourself
in order to generate the effort.
I really want to underscore this.
If you're somebody that's thinking,
maybe I go for the run, maybe I don't go for the run,
and I'll do it at two o'clock, okay, 2.05.
No, I only want to go on the half hour
or maybe on the main hour.
And you're going through all that, guess what?
You're burning up useful energy
that you could use either for the run, for example,
or for something else.
When we think about something hard, when we ruminate,
when we perseverate on an idea or on a decision,
we are burning neural energy
and neural energy is glucose and epinephrine
and all the things we talked about before.
So willpower in part is the ability to devote resources
to things and part of that is making decisions
to just either do it or not do it.
I'm not of the just do it mindset.
I think there's a right time and a place to train,
but I also think that it is not good.
In other words, it utilizes excessive resources
to churn over decisions excessively,
and you probably burn as much cognitive energy
deciding about whether or not to do a given training or not
as you do in the actual training, okay?
So we'll talk more about how this long duration effort
can relate to mental performance,
but the long duration effort should be one set,
12 minutes or longer.
It could go for 30 minutes or 60 minutes or an hour.
We'll talk about programming later in the episode.
This is going to be less than 100%
of your maximum oxygen uptake.
Your heart rate is not going to be through the ceiling
or maxed out, but it's all about efficiency of movement.
That's what you're building.
When you go out for a run that's 30 minutes,
you are building the capacity to repeat that performance
the next time while being more efficient,
actually burning less fuel, and that might seem
a little bit counterintuitive,
but every time you do that run,
what you're doing is you're building up
mitochondrial density.
It's not so much about mitochondrial oxidation
and respiration.
You're building up mitochondrial density.
You're actually increasing the amount of ATP
that you can create for a given bout of effort.
You're becoming more efficient, okay?
You're burning less fuel overall, doing the same thing.
That's really what these long slow distance
or long bouts of effort are really all about.
Now, why do this long duration effort?
Why would you want to do it?
Why is it good for you?
Well, it does something very important,
which is that it builds the capillary beds within muscles.
So let's talk a little bit about vasculature.
We haven't done this too much yet,
but if you have seen the episode
on supercharging performance,
we talked about AVAs, these arteriovenous osteomoses,
where blood moves from arteries directly into veins,
but that's unusual.
That only takes place in the so-called glabrous skin
of the palms, the face, and the bottoms of the feet.
Typically, for most all other areas of the body,
what happens is arteries bring blood to a given tissue,
like a muscle, and veins return that blood back to the heart.
There are exceptions, but in general,
and in between arteries and veins are these little tiny,
what are called capillary beds or microcapillaries.
So these are tiny little avenues,
like little tiny streams and estuaries
between the bigger arteries and veins.
Now, those are actually contained within muscle,
and what's amazing is that you can increase
the number of them.
You can literally build new capillaries.
You can create new little streams within your muscles,
and the type of long-duration effort
that I was talking about before,
12 minutes or more of steady effort,
is very useful for doing that,
and is very useful for increasing the mitochondria,
the energy-producing elements of the cells,
the actual muscle cells,
and the reason is when blood arrives to muscles,
it has oxygen,
the muscles are going to use some of that oxygen,
and then some of the deoxygenated blood
is going to be sent back to the heart and to the lungs.
Now, the more capillaries that you build into those muscles,
the more oxygen available to those muscles.
I don't want to get too much into the physics of fluid flow,
but basically it's the difference between taking a hose
and sticking it into some dirt just directly,
and turning on the faucet at a given rate,
the spigot rather,
or having a bunch of little hoses like a sprinkler system
that go out and irrigate the whole yard.
The irrigation is equivalent to this capillary bed system,
and it's very good at using energy sources within blood.
So the simple way to think about this is
when you go out for a run,
let's say it's the first run you've done for a while,
and you go out for 12 or 15 minutes,
and somewhere right around 20 minutes,
you're like, that's it, I just can't continue.
Well, when you come back the next time to do that run,
you've built endurance,
largely because you've built these capillary beds,
you've expanded these little streams
in which blood can deliver oxygen to the muscles.
And so it's going to feel relatively straightforward
to either go a little bit quicker for the same duration,
the same distance,
or to extend that run for another five to 10 minutes.
So this long duration work, unlike muscular endurance,
like planks and everything that we were talking about before
is really about building the capillary systems
and the mitochondria, the energy utilization systems
within the muscles themselves.
And that's very important to understand.
It's distinctly different than say,
building the neurons that fire the muscles.
The neurons are already there,
they're going to fire those muscles just fine.
In fact, if your life depended on it today,
you could probably run a marathon.
You'd probably get injured,
it would be very psychologically and physically painful,
I don't recommend you do that unless you're trained for it.
But if you were to train properly for it,
if you were to do long duration bouts of effort
once or twice a week, or three times a week,
pretty soon it would become easy
because you're building these vascular microbeds
or microvascular beds as they're called.
Okay, so you're able to bring more energy to the muscles
and they're able to utilize more energy.
So that's long duration.
So we've got muscular endurance
and we've got long duration endurance.
And then there are two kinds in between
that in recent years have gotten a lot of attention
and excitement,
but most people are not distinguishing
between these two kinds of endurance.
And that's a shame because in failing to distinguish
between the two kinds of what we call
high intensity training,
sometimes called high intensity interval training,
most people, perhaps you,
are not getting nearly as much physical and mental benefit
out of high intensity training as you could.
So I want to talk about the two kinds
of high intensity interval training
and what each of them does for your brain and body
and what sorts of adaptations they cause,
because in doing that,
you can really start to build up specific energy systems
in your brain and body in ways that best serve you
for your cognitive work
and for other sorts of things like strength and speed
or hypertrophy or for running marathons for that matter.
So there are two kinds of high intensity training
for endurance,
sometimes called high intensity interval training.
One is anaerobic, so-called anaerobic endurance,
so no oxygen,
and the other is aerobic endurance,
both of which qualify as HIIT,
high intensity interval training.
So let's talk about anaerobic endurance first.
Anaerobic endurance from a protocol perspective
is going to be three to 12 sets, okay?
And these repetitions,
and I'll talk about what the repetitions are,
are going to be performed at whatever speed
allows you to complete the work in good, safe form, okay?
So it could be fast, it could be slow.
As the work continues,
your repetitions may slow down or it may speed up.
Chances are it's going to slow down.
So what does this work?
What do these sets look like?
Remember, long, slow distance is one set.
Muscular endurance is three to five sets.
High intensity anaerobic endurance
is going to be somewhere between three and 12 sets.
And it's going to have a ratio of work to rest
of anywhere from three to one to one to five, okay?
So what would a three to one ratio set look like?
Well, it's going to be 30 seconds of hard pedaling
on the bike, for instance, or running, or on the rower.
These are just examples.
It could be in the pool swimming.
It could be any number of things or air squats
or weighted squats, if you will,
provided you can manage that.
30 seconds on, 10 seconds off.
That's a very brief rest.
So three to one is just a good example
would be 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off.
The opposite extreme on that ratio would be one to five.
So 20 seconds on, 100 seconds off.
So you do the work for 20 seconds,
then you rest 100 seconds.
Now what's the difference?
Should you do three to one ratio?
So 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off,
or should you do one to five,
20 seconds on to 100 seconds off?
Well, that will depend on whether or not
the quality of the movement is important to you.
So let's just take a look at the three to one ratio.
So in the three to one ratio,
if you're going to do 30 seconds of hard pedaling on a bike
followed by 10 seconds,
so maybe one of these, what they call assault bikes,
and then you stop for 10 seconds and then repeat,
chances are you will be able to do one, two, three, four,
maybe even as many as 12 sets
if you're really in good condition,
that you'll be able to do all those
because pedaling on the bike doesn't require a ton of skill.
And if you do it incorrectly,
if your elbow flares out a little bit or something,
it's very unlikely that you'll get injured
unless it's really extreme, okay?
But the same movement done, for instance, with kettlebells,
so 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off,
the first set will probably be in good form.
The second one will be in pretty good form,
but let's say you're getting to the fifth and sixth set
and you're going 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off,
chances are the quality of your repetitions
will degrade significantly
and you increase the probability
that you're going to get injured
or that you're going to damage yourself in some way
or that you can't complete the movement
or that some smaller muscles
like your grip muscles might give out, okay?
So the quality of repetitions is going to drop
considerably with the three-to-one approach.
If you're just doing it for effort,
and we'll talk about what this builds in your system
in a moment, that's fine.
But for most people, if quality of form is important,
so maybe this is using weights, maybe you're doing squats,
so you're going to do 20 seconds on and 100 seconds of rest,
maybe it's even a barbell-loaded squat,
maybe you're doing kettlebells,
maybe you've got some other resistance there
that's allowing you to do this,
what you'll find is that the longer rest,
even though it's 20 seconds of intense effort
followed by a longer rest of about 100 seconds
will allow you to perform more quality repetitions
safely over time.
So what does building anaerobic endurance look like?
And then I'll tell you what it's actually good for
in the true practical sense.
What anaerobic endurance exercise generally looks like
is that if you decide to do this for the first week,
you might do this two or three times a week,
maybe even just once a week,
depending on the other things you're doing,
we'll talk about programming at the end,
and you would generate just three sets,
so it might be three sets of 20 seconds of hard effort
followed by 100 seconds rest,
then you repeat 20 seconds of hard effort,
100 seconds rest, 20 seconds of effort, 100 seconds rest,
and you might do that twice a week,
and then each week you're adding one or two sets, okay?
In doing that, you will build up
what we call anaerobic endurance.
What is anaerobic endurance?
Well, let's ask why we fail.
Anaerobic endurance is going to be taking your system
into greater than 100% of your VO2 max.
It's going to be taking your heart rate up very high,
and it's going to maximize your oxygen utilization systems.
That is going to have effects
that are going to lead to fatigue
at some point in the workout,
and that fatigue will trigger an adaptation,
so let's ask what adaptation it's triggering.
Well, it's triggering both mitochondrial respiration,
the ability of your mitochondria to generate more energy
by using more oxygen because you're bringing so,
you're maxing out,
literally you're getting above your VO2 max.
You're hitting that threshold of how much oxygen
you can use in your system.
One of the adaptations will be that your mitochondria
will shift such that they can use more oxygen,
and you're going to also increase the capillary beds,
but not as much as you're going to be able
to increase the amount of neuron engagement of muscle.
So normally when we start to hit fatigue,
when we're exhausted, when we're breathing really hard,
because the systems of the body are linked
and there's a mental component to this as well,
a kind of motivational component,
after that third or fourth or sixth set of,
20 seconds on, 100 seconds off,
or if you're at the other extreme,
30 seconds on and 10 seconds off,
there's going to be a component of you want to stop
and by pushing through and repeating another set safely,
of course, what you're doing is you're training the neurons
to be able to access more energy,
literally convert that into ATP and for the muscles
therefore to access more energy and ATP,
and the adaptation is in the mitochondria's ability
to use oxygen, and this has tremendous carryover effects
for other types of exercise.
So while I know and appreciate that people
are using high-intensity interval training
of this kind or similar in order to just like burn fat,
do their workouts, quote unquote,
it's very useful for building a capacity
to engage in short bouts of effort repeatedly,
to really lock in, I don't want to use the word focus
because it's not strictly mental focus,
but to be able to generate short bouts of very intense work.
This can be beneficial in competitive sports or team sports
where there's a sprinting component,
where the field opens up and you need to dribble the ball
down the field, for instance, and shoot on goal,
or where you're playing tennis and it's a long rally
and then all of a sudden somebody really starts
putting you back on your heels
and you have to really make the maximum amount of effort
to run to the net and to get the ball across the net,
things of that sort, okay?
There are a variety of places where there's carryover
from this type of training, but it does support endurance.
It's about muscle endurance.
It's about these muscles ability to generate a lot of force
in the short term, but repeatedly, okay?
So that's the way to conceptualize this.
And it is different than maximum power.
Even though it feels like maximum effort,
it is not the same as building power and speed into muscles.
Those are distinctly different protocols.
So the key elements, again,
are that you're bringing your breathing
and your oxygen utilization way up above your max.
It's not quite hitting failure,
but you're really pushing the system to the point
where you are not ready to do another set
and yet you begin another set.
You're not necessarily psychologically ready.
I'll talk more about some of the adaptations
that this causes in terms of stroke volume
in a few minutes when we talk about
how it is that work of this sort
can increase our heart's ability to deliver blood
and oxygen to our lungs and other tissues.
I'm going to get very specific about how to breathe
during these different types of protocols
and what's happening at the level of the heart.
But I want to make sure I touch on the fourth protocol,
which is high-intensity aerobic conditioning.
So HIIT has these two forms, anaerobic and aerobic.
And you just heard about anaerobic.
High-intensity aerobic conditioning
also involves about three to 12 sets starting off,
of course, with fewer sets
as you're getting into this training
and then extending into more sets
as one parameter you could expand.
Has, again, the same ratio of three to one,
so 30 seconds on, 10 seconds off, or one to five,
20 seconds on, 100 seconds off,
or a very powerful tool for building up aerobic conditioning
is a one-to-one ratio.
A one-to-one ratio is powerful
for building, on average,
most of the energy systems involving,
remember, we had these nerve, muscle, blood,
heart, and lungs.
A one-to-one ratio might be you run a mile
and however long that takes,
let's say it takes you six minutes or seven minutes,
then you rest for an equivalent amount of time,
then you repeat,
and then you rest for an equivalent amount of time.
So you might run, first mile is, let's say, seven minutes,
then you rest for seven minutes,
then you run a mile again,
and it might take eight minutes,
and you rest for eight minutes,
and you continue that for a total of four miles of work,
for four miles of running work, I should say,
or seven miles of work.
You can build this up.
Many people find that using this type of training
allows them to do things like go run half marathons
and marathons, even though prior to the race date,
they've never actually run a half marathon or marathon.
Now, that might seem incredible.
It's like, how could it be that running a mile on
and then resting for an equivalent amount of time,
running a mile, resting for equivalent amount of time
for seven miles allows you to run continuously
for 13 miles or for 26 miles?
Well, I'm not discouraging people
from ever doing the long duration endurance.
I think that is very important,
but it's because it builds up
so many of these energy utilization systems.
It really teaches you to engage, excuse me,
the nerve to muscle firing.
It improves ATP and mitochondrial function in muscle.
It allows the blood to deliver more oxygen
to the muscle and to your brain.
And I'll explain how that is.
And it allows your heart to deliver more oxygen overall.
And it builds a tremendous lung capacity.
And we will talk about exactly how to breathe
and how to build lung capacity,
both for sake of warming up and for performance.
So what would this look like
and when should you do this?
Well, it's really a question for these workouts
of asking how much work can one do in eight to 12 minutes?
And then rest and then repeat.
How much work can you do for eight to 12 minutes,
then rest and then repeat?
And how many times should you do this?
Well, this is the sort of thing, it's pretty intense.
And so you would probably only want to do this
two, maybe three times a week
if you're not doing many other things.
I will talk about how this program can be moved in
with other forms of training,
but I'll just give you a little hint now.
It's very clear.
And it's described in the review article referred to,
and we will link another article as well.
That concurrent training, doing strength training
and the endurance training of any of the four kinds
that I'm describing today can be done.
You can program those in the same week,
but you want to get four and ideally six
or even better 24 hours between these workouts
because it is very hard, for instance,
to do a one-to-one mile repeats
like run a mile, rest for equivalent time,
run a mile, rest for equivalent time,
to do that two or three times a week
and also do weight training before
or do a long run afterwards.
That would quickly lead to breakdown for most people
unless you have very, very good energy utilization systems.
You're a really kind of advanced or elite athlete
and or dare I say you're using tools
to enhance your performance at the level of blood
or hormones.
And I'm actually going to talk about those at the end
and why they work.
So we have four kinds of endurance, muscular endurance.
We have long duration endurance.
We have high intensity interval training of two kinds,
anaerobic and aerobic.
And this last type, the aerobic one works best it seems
if you kind of do this one-to-one ratio.
So how would you use these and what are they actually doing?
Let's talk about the heart and the lungs and oxygen
because that's something that we can all benefit
from understanding.
And it will become very clear in that discussion
why this type of training is very useful
even for non-athletes in order to improve oxygenation
and energy utilization of the brain and the heart.
The brain and the heart are probably
the two most important systems
that you need to take care of in your life.
Yes, your musculature needs to be maintained.
If you want to build it, that's up to you,
but you should try and maintain your musculature
but maintaining or enhancing a brain function
and cardiovascular function.
It's absolutely clear our key for health and longevity
in the short and long-term.
And the sorts of training I talked about today
has been shown again and again and again
to be very useful for enhancing the strength of the mind.
Yes, I'll talk about that.
As well as the health of the brain and the body.
So let's talk about the sorts of adaptations
that are happening in your brain and body
that are so beneficial in these different forms of training.
If you are breathing hard and your heart is beating hard,
so this would be certainly in the high-intensity anaerobic
and aerobic conditioning,
because you're getting up near your VO2 max
in high-intensity aerobic conditioning,
and you're exceeding your VO2 max
in high-intensity anaerobic conditioning,
what's going to happen is,
as of course your heart beats faster,
your blood is going to be circulating faster in principle.
Oxygen utilization in muscles is going to go up.
And over time, not long, very quickly,
what will happen when those capillary beds
start to expand, we talked about that.
But in addition, because of the amount of blood
that's being returned to the heart,
when you engage in these really intense bouts of effort,
repeatedly, the amount of blood being returned to the heart
actually causes an eccentric loading
of one of the muscular walls of the heart.
So your heart is muscle, it's cardiac muscle.
We have skeletal muscle attached to our bones
and we have cardiac muscle, which is our heart.
When more blood is being returned to the heart
because of the additional work
that your muscles and nerves are doing,
it actually has the effect of creating an eccentric loading,
a kind of pushing of the wall, the left wall.
I realize I'm not using the strict anatomy here,
but I don't want to get into all the features of,
the structural features of the heart.
But the left ventricle essentially getting slammed back
and then having to push back
in a kind of eccentric loading of the cardiac muscle
and the muscle thickens,
but not because the heart thickens overall,
it's actually a strengthening of the cardiac muscle
in a way that increases what we call stroke volume.
Meaning as more blood is returned to the heart,
there's an adaptation where the heart muscle
actually gets stronger and therefore can pump more blood
per stroke, per beat.
And as it does that, it delivers,
because blood contains glucose and oxygen and other things,
it delivers more fuel to your muscles,
which allows you to do yet more work per unit time.
So when we hear that, oh, so-and-so has a,
or maybe you have a nice low heart rate
that maybe you're one of these really extreme folks
like 30 or 40 beats per minute,
although most people are sitting at 50, 60, 70, 80,
that's your resting heart rate.
If you exercise regularly
and you do long duration aerobic work,
your heart rate will start to go down,
your resting heart rate.
It will increase the stroke volume of your heart.
If you do this high intensity type training
where your heart is beating very hard,
so maybe the one-to-one ratio mile run repeats
that I described a minute ago,
let's say you do that twice a week for three or four,
and I said it could go all the way up to 12 sets,
which is a lot, I don't recommend people start there.
Pretty soon, the stroke volume of your heart
will really increase, and as a consequence,
you can deliver more fuel to your muscles and to your brain,
and you will notice that you can do more work,
meaning you can do the same work you were doing a few days
or weeks ago with relative ease.
Your cognitive functioning will improve.
This has been shown again and again
because there's an increase in vasculature,
literally capillary beds within the brain,
the hippocampus areas that support memory,
but also areas of the brain that support respiration,
that support focus, that support effort.
This isn't often discussed,
but the ability to deliver more blood
and therefore more glucose,
remember neurons run on glucose and oxygen to the brain
is a big feature of why exercise of the kind I'm describing
helps with brain function.
Now, weight training does have some positive effects
on brain function also.
When I say weight training, I'm really,
I should be more specific,
I really am referring to strength and hypertrophy training.
Strength and hypertrophy training,
especially if it's of the sort where you get into the burn,
as we talked about last episode,
and you start generating lactate as a hormonal signal
that can benefit your brain, et cetera,
it can have positive effects on the brain.
And frankly, there haven't been as many studies
of resistance training,
strength and hypertrophy training on brain function,
mainly because most of those experiments
are done in mice or primates, non-human primates,
I should say,
and it's hard to get mice to do resistance training, okay?
It's hard to get humans to do resistance training.
It's definitely hard to get mice to do resistance training.
There are ways to do it,
but it's hard to get them to do, say,
three sets of eight on the deadlift
and then do some curls and then do some chin ups
and this kind of thing, okay?
It's pretty easy to get a mouse to run on a treadmill
and you can set the tension on that treadmill
to make it so that it's easier or harder
for the mouse to turn that wheel.
So that's one of the reasons.
However, it's very clear
and you should now understand intuitively
why the kind of standard strength
and hypertrophy type workouts
are not going to activate the blood oxygenation
and the stroke volume increases for the heart
that the sorts of training I'm talking about today will,
it just doesn't have the same positive effects.
Now, that isn't to say that if you just weight train,
that you'll be dumb
or that you'll lose your memory over time.
You might, but it is to say that endurance work,
in particular, the high intensity and long duration work
that I've talked about today,
the two high intensity protocols and the long duration work
has been shown again and again and again
to have positive effects on brain function,
not through the addition of new neurons.
Sorry to break it to you,
but that's not a major event
in the exercised or non-exercised human brain
for reasons we can talk about in a future episode,
but it still has many positive effects
through the delivery of things like IGF-1,
but also just through plain oxygenation of the brain
and the way it promotes the development of microvasculature
to develop, excuse me, to deliver neurons more nutrients.
If neurons don't get oxygen and glucose, they do die,
unless there's another fuel source like ketones,
which can replace the glucose.
If you don't give oxygen to neurons,
if you don't deliver enough to them,
you get what's called ischemia,
you get little micro strokes.
So the type of exercise I'm talking about today
in generating intense heart rate increases,
provided that's safe for you to do, breathing hard,
that's going to deliver oxygen and blood,
increase stroke volume of the heart,
and is going to improve brain function.
This has been supported by many,
many quality peer reviewed studies.
So that's one form of positive adaptation.
I also talked about just sort of performance adaptations,
how doing high intensity aerobic conditioning
of the, you know, mile repeats type training
can actually improve your ability
to do long bouts of intense work.
It also seems like it dovetails
or is compatible with resistance training
that's aimed towards strength and hypertrophy.
Now in full disclosure, the data seemed to indicate
that if people just weight train or train for strength,
so three reps, rest five minutes,
three reps of heavy weights, et cetera,
yeah, you'll get much stronger than you would
if you're doing things like, you know,
five repetitions up to 12 or 12 to 25 reps,
and you're, you know, and you're going out for long jogs.
There's always going to be a compromise
in adaptations, unfortunately.
It does seem like you can do concurrent training,
as I mentioned before, if you allow anywhere from four
to six or ideally 24 hours between workouts.
As I mentioned in the previous episode,
if you want to know if you are recovered from a workout,
a great way to do that is to apply
the carbon dioxide tolerance test,
which is four breaths in and out, inhale, exhale,
inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale, inhale, exhale,
then a big inhale, and then a slow controlled exhale.
If that slow controlled exhale is 60 seconds or longer,
it means that your parasympathetic,
your calming nervous system is under your control,
and it's likely, I should say likely,
that systemically your whole nervous system has recovered
from whatever it is that you've been doing
and experiencing in life, including work and relationships.
If not, you might want to take a rest day, dare I say,
or Costello is on his, what, he's 10 now,
I think he's on his 12,000th rest day.
Most people need, I should say,
one to two full rest days per week.
I know there are people who are going to say,
that's ridiculous, and okay,
maybe you have amazing recovery abilities.
Also depends on training intensity.
Many people benefit from having one or two
full rest days per week, at least one.
Some people don't need to,
but if you are not able to extend that exhale
on the carbon dioxide tolerance test
past 60 seconds or so, 45 seconds, 60 seconds,
chances are your so-called sympathetic nervous system,
your stress system is chronically elevated
and you're not really putting the brake
on that system enough, and that's a subconscious thing.
There are ways that you can accelerate recovery,
but I would encourage you to listen to the previous episode.
It's timestamped for how to assess recovery.
So how often to program these things
will depend on the other things you're doing.
I think it's perfectly reasonable
to do this type of training with other types of training,
and I'll talk about a variety of combinations of those
toward the end of the episode.
I do want to talk about how to deliver
more energy and oxygen.
These are tools that are extremely useful, I believe,
and that are grounded in physiology.
The three things I'd like to talk about
are how to breathe,
what to do immediately after training, and hydration.
And I promise I will get back into programming
and sort of protocols, but these are vitally important
to your ability to perform endurance work in particular,
and they are grounded in how neurons and blood and oxygen
and your heart work together.
So let's first talk about breathing or respiration.
We breathe a couple of different ways,
but let's just remind ourselves why we breathe.
We breathe to bring oxygen into our system,
and we breathe to get rid of carbon dioxide.
And we need both oxygen and carbon dioxide
in order to utilize fuel and for our brain and body to work.
It's not that oxygen is good and carbon dioxide is bad.
They have to be present in the appropriate ratios.
So one thing that is very clear
is our ability to deliver oxygen to working muscles
and to our brain is going to be important
for our ability to generate muscular effort,
especially of the kind I was talking about today,
but also weight training
and other forms of skill-based effort, et cetera,
and our ability to think.
If you're holding your breath for too long,
if you're breathing too much,
if you're what they call over-breathing or under-breathing,
if you're shallow breathing, if you're mouth breathing,
these are all things that can really impede
mental and physical performance.
So let's make it really simple,
and then I promise to do a future episode
all about respiration.
There are two main sources of air for your body,
and it's air coming in through your nose
and air coming in through your mouth.
In general, nasal breathing is better.
It scrubs the air of bacteria and viruses.
You have a microbiome in your nose that benefits.
There are a number of reasons.
It's also just a more efficient system, believe it or not.
Even though it feels like you can gulp more air
with your mouth, getting good at nasal breathing is useful.
A gear system of the type that Brian McKenzie
and colleagues have developed,
I think is a good way to conceptualize this.
If you're doing long duration work,
try and do it all nasal breathing.
If you have deviated septum,
it's probably because you don't nasal breathe enough.
Mouth breathing is something that many people suffer from.
You're more prone to infections.
It's not as efficient, et cetera.
There is a place for mouth breathing.
However, it's usually if you need to do a strong exhale,
oftentimes you can discard more volume through the mouth
unless you're very trained at nasal breathing.
So if you're doing high intensity training,
a good way to conceptualize this is to exhale
on the max effort and then to inhale
on the less intense part.
So that might be as you're generating the movement,
in the concentric part of the movement, you exhale, right?
Just like on a bat swing or something like that,
or fighters and martial artists do this differently
depending on how they were trained
and the different purposes, but the kind of like,
or the kind of exhaling during the effort
and then inhaling on the portion of the repetition
that is not the highest effort portion.
Usually that's the eccentric phase
of anything involving weights or rowing
and things of that sort.
So nasal breathing is great,
but as you increase the intensity of your endurance work,
you will need to incorporate the mouth.
So a gear system would look something like,
first gear would be just nasal breathing
or second gear would also be just nasal breathing,
but with more effort.
Third gear, again, power speed endurance
has a lot more about this.
You can go to their website.
I think it's a very intelligent way to conceptualize this.
As you go into more max effort,
then you're going into third and fourth and fifth gear
and at some point you're not thinking about nose or mouth.
You're just trying to hang on for dear life
and complete the work safely.
And that means breathe through whatever orifice
works for you.
So that's one aspect, nose versus mouth.
The other aspect is whether or not you're using your ribs,
the intercostal muscles are these muscles
that the Bruce Lee had these remarkable
intercostal muscles that allow you to lift the rib cage
or the diaphragm, which is a skeletal muscle
that sits below the lungs.
Just to remind you, when you inhale, the diaphragm moves down
when you exhale, the diaphragm moves up.
Here's something that most people don't do
and would benefit tremendously from.
And I can say this because Andy Galpin's lab
has done work on this, exploring how warming up
the intercostals and the nerve to diaphragm pathways
before any kind of endurance work,
or in the first few minutes of endurance work
can allow you to breathe more deeply
and to deliver more oxygen to the blood and, excuse me,
and to the muscles and to be able to do more work
more efficiently.
So what that involves is sometimes sitting,
sometimes standing and just really concentrating
on two things.
We always hear about how we should diaphragmatic breathe
and that means our belly moves out when we inhale.
So our stomach expands, but also expanding the intercostals,
which means actually raising the ribs, chest breathing.
We're all told that in yoga class,
don't breathe with your chest this,
but actually that is warming up the intercostal muscles.
So this is also a great way to generate adrenaline
if you do it a little bit intensely.
So let's say you're feeling unmotivated to train.
I don't particularly like doing endurance training
until I'm actually doing it.
So I use and benefit from having a practice
where I'll just sit there and for about three minutes,
I'll just breathe very deeply,
trying to raise my chest as much as I can
for maybe a minute and then expanding,
contracting my diaphragm and expanding my stomach outward
when I inhale.
By the end of that,
you're actually delivering more oxygen to your system.
My lab has looked at this in a totally different context.
Andy's lab has looked at it in the context
of physical performance.
So warming up the breathing muscles should make sense
given that you now know that muscles and neurons
need glucose and they need oxygen in order to function.
And so that's a great warmup.
You can also do this while walking
or while getting on the bike and starting to pedal,
really starting to think about
warming up the breathing system.
And then you can decide if you want to do pure nasal
or a combination of nasal and mouth breathing and so on.
So that's something that we don't often hear about.
The other one, the other tool rather
that I've talked about in a previous episode,
I'll just mention again,
is some people when they do endurance type work,
they get a stitch in their side.
They feel like they've got a side cramp.
Very rarely is it actually a skeletal muscular cramp.
It's oftentimes, it's a referenced pain
of the phrenic nerve that innervates the liver.
So the phrenic nerve is responsible
for the movement of the diaphragm.
It is a very important system,
but it has a number of what we call collateral.
So it branches to other organs, runs over other organs.
Sometimes when we're breathing shallow
and we are in physical motion
and we're engaging in physical effort,
we'll feel that side stitch and we think,
oh, I've got a cramp, or maybe I'm dehydrated,
or maybe I need to run with my hands over my head.
Excuse me.
Typically you can relieve that side cramp,
which isn't a cramp at all,
that side stitch by doing the double inhale, exhale,
really breathing deeply,
and then sneaking a little bit more air in.
That's a double kind of firing,
or what we call volley of action potentials
sent from the phrenic nerve to the diaphragm,
which will also activate that collateral,
that branch literally of the nerve that innervates the liver.
And then when you exhale,
you offload a bunch of carbon dioxide.
But if you repeat that a few times, often,
in fact for me every time,
but often what'll happen is that side stitch
will just naturally disappear.
It just means you're not breathing properly.
The phrenic nerve is firing in a way
that's kind of aggravating that referenced pain.
There's nothing kind of voodoo or mysterious about this.
It just has to do with the way
that the different nerves travel in the body.
So as you set out on your run,
or maybe you're going to do some muscular endurance work
or high-intensity work, warming up the intercostals,
warming up the diaphragm is good.
And there are exercises,
there is work that you can do
to strengthen the intercostals
and to strengthen the diaphragm
during bouts of this kind of effort.
And I would say that one of the ways
that you can do that best is by really focusing
on getting the maximum diaphragmatic expansion
and chest lifting, what we're all told now not to do.
Don't chest breathe, belly breathe.
The intercostals are there for a reason,
and they are perfectly good at filling your lungs.
They work best when they collaborate with your diaphragm.
But when you are starting to fatigue,
to start to really inhale deeply
and try and really expand those
to deliver more oxygen to your system.
While we're talking about delivering more oxygen
to your system, I want to share with you a useful tool
that will now make total sense mechanistically
why it works, which is oftentimes when we are on a long run
or in long duration bouts of effort,
we will hit the so-called wall, right?
We will bonk, I think they used to call it,
or maybe do they still call it that, Costello?
He's asleep.
We bonk, we just rethink, no, we can't continue.
It's a curious thing as to whether or not that's neural
or whether or not it's fuel-based.
There's certainly going to be a psychological
or motivational component,
but one way that you can reveal this kind of extra gear,
the capacity to push on is by understanding the way
that different muscle fibers use energy differently.
Remember the fast twitch phosphocreatine system
and the slow twitch system that relies mainly
on lipids and glucose.
Okay, well, even if you don't remember all that,
if you've been running steadily for a long time
and you're starting to fatigue
and you feel like it's time to quit,
you may have not tapped into an alternative fuel source.
One thing that you can do
is you can actually increase your speed.
This is also true of work where you're doing repetitions
with kettlebells or something.
You can start to increase your speed.
So run faster, pedal faster, row faster, swim faster,
not all out sprint, but in doing that,
you're shifting the muscles and the nerves
over towards utilizing a separate fuel source
or a distinct fuel source.
Maybe the phosphocreatine system,
if it's a quick bout of intense acceleration,
or maybe it's a combination of lipids and carbohydrates
in your system that weren't available to you prior.
Now, of course, if you completely deplete
your liver glycogen, you completely deplete everything,
you're only going to be running on stored fuel and fats
and eventually you'll start metabolizing protein
or muscles themselves.
But this is a kind of a unique way to realize that,
oh, you weren't out of energy at all,
you were just over relying on one fuel source.
And this is the reason why, especially elite athletes
are starting to both rely on carbohydrates,
so they're doing the whole carb depletion
then carb loading thing,
they're loading up their liver and their muscles
with plenty of glycogen by eating pastas and rice
and stuff before races,
but they are also ingesting ketones during races,
during long bouts of effort,
because ketones can be a quick form of energy,
there's no reason why you can't use ketones
if they are taken exogenous ketones
and carbohydrate and in combination.
Remember the body is accustomed
to using multiple fuel sources, fatty acids, carbohydrates,
all these things, it's only in the kind of internet age
that we think in terms of, oh, well, you're either keto
or you're burning sugar or you're fat adapted
or fat fasting or fast fasting or fat fadding,
Costello woke up when I said fat fadding,
I'm not talking about you Costello.
So the point is that your body is used
to using multiple fuel sources,
so if you're kind of hitting that wall,
sometimes accelerating can actually allow you
to tap into a new fuel source
or combination of fuel sources
just based on the way that muscles use fuel,
so that's another tool.
The other thing that's really important to think about
in terms of endurance type work is hydration,
and I think hydration is important for all forms
of physical work and exercise, not just endurance.
The deal with hydration is that we've been taught
about hydration all wrong,
but let's remember what neurons work on,
what do they use in order to fire?
Well, they certainly need water, right?
We need water in our system, I should say,
but remember they use electrolytes, sodium and potassium
to generate those action potentials
to actually get neurons to contract,
to be able, excuse me, muscles to contract
and for our brain to function and to be able to think.
Typically, typically we're going to lose anywhere
from one to five pounds of water per hour of exercise,
and that's going to vary tremendously,
it's going to vary on weather,
it's going to vary on intensity,
probably more like five pounds if it's hot day
and you're exercising very intensely,
so about one to five pounds per hour.
Now, you know how much you weigh,
so if you think about your weight in pounds,
once you lose about one to 4% of your body weight in water,
you're going to experience about a 20 to 30% reduction
in work capacity, in your ability to generate effort
of any kind, strength, endurance, et cetera.
You are also going to experience a significant drop
in your ability to think and perform mental operations,
so hydration is key.
Now, many people have been told, well,
if you urinate and your urine is clear,
well, then you're hydrated enough.
Sometimes that's true, sometimes that's not true.
Also, and this is a topic I enjoy discussing,
but urine is a biological phenomenon,
it's actually filtered blood.
Every once in a while, if there's a kid
and it's a family friend, I'll say,
did you know that your pee is actually filtered blood?
And they usually kind of go wide-eyed,
but then they go, oh, that's kind of cool,
like kids have this natural curiosity
about blood and pee and stuff
that's not contaminated by our preconceived notions
of those things being gross.
Because urine being filtered blood
can give you some indication
as to whether or not you're hydrated enough or not.
And in order to really assess that,
it's not going to be sufficient
to urinate into another volume of water
and assess whether or not your urine
is very dark or very light.
It actually requires urinating into a small volume
and saying, well, is it darker or lighter than before?
It's not something you really want to do most places.
The etiquette of most gyms and environments
is not suitable for that.
But one of the things that you can just do
is you can figure, well,
I'm going to lose one to five pounds of water per hour.
You can show up to exercise reasonably hydrated
with electrolytes.
So potassium, sodium, and magnesium are really key.
Yes, it's true.
You can die from drinking too much water in particular
because it forces you, if you drink too much water,
you'll excrete too many electrolytes
and your brain will shut off.
You'll actually, your heart will stop functioning properly.
So you don't want to over consume water
to the extreme either.
But there are a number of equations
that go into figuring out how much water you need
based on how intense your training,
et cetera, body size, et cetera.
Just remember, you burn, you lose, excuse me,
about one to five pounds of water per hour,
depending on how hot it is and how intensely you're exercising
once your body weight drops by one to 4%.
So you can just figure it,
well, if you lose five pounds per hour,
you exercise for two hours,
let's say you're about 200 pounds, that's about 10%, okay?
Well, you want to replace that very quickly
or you want to replace that all along
before you start experiencing this massive 20 or 30%
reduction in work capacity of muscles and the brain.
A simple formula, what I call the Galpin equation,
hereafter referred to as the Galpin equation,
is a formula that gets you close to the exact amount
that you would want that Dr. Andy Galpin came up with,
which is your body weight in pounds
divided by the number 30.
And that is how many ounces you should drink
for every 15 minutes of exercise.
So once again, the Galpin equation,
your body weight in pounds divided by 30,
that's the amount of fluid to drink in ounces, right?
Every 15 minutes of exercise.
Now, if you are sweating a lot, you may need more, okay?
If you're already very well hydrated, you may need less,
but that's a good rule of thumb to begin
and to start to understand the relationship
between hydration and performance.
There is a phenomenon in which gastric emptying,
the ability to move stuff out of your gut,
including water and electrolytes out of your gut
and into the bloodstream and for delivery
to the tissues of your body for effort,
is hindered when you get above 70% of your VO2 max.
In other words, when you're doing high intensity training,
sometimes people experience that ingesting water
during intense training is difficult.
It is something that can be actually trained up.
It's a matter of learning to kind of relax
your abdominal muscles.
And there are some other aspects of adaptation
that will allow you to drink during higher intensity work.
As Galpin says, don't try and ingest fluids
when you're working out or competing at higher
than 70% of VO2 max, if you've never done it before,
you want to train up this capacity.
People can learn how to consume fluids during a race
or consume fluids during bouts of exercise
that are very intense.
And a lot of people don't want to do that
because they don't want to have to stop to urinate, et cetera.
But given the crucial role of hydration
for muscular performance and for brain performance,
it seems that if you're going to be doing
a lot of high intensity interval training
of the various kinds I talked about today,
or high intensity training of any kind,
that hydration is key and learning,
or in other words, getting your system to adapt
to ingesting fluids in the middle of these workouts
is something that seems beneficial, at least to me,
in terms of the trade-off between being dehydrated
and the somewhat discomfort of maybe drinking some fluids.
So you sip small amounts of fluid initially,
and then you're able to take bigger and bigger gulps
as time goes on, and pretty soon you're able to drink
mid-set or be, excuse me, not mid-set,
please don't do that, between sets in your workout
or while you're still breathing hard after a mile repeat
or something of that sort without much disruption
or any at all to your performance.
Last episode, we talked about how to assess recovery
and things that you might want to do to improve recovery,
how exposure to ice baths and cold showers
can reduce inflammation, which can be great for recovery.
But can inhibit some of the adaptations
for strength and hypertrophy
because inflammation isn't good or bad.
Inflammation isn't like a nice person or a mean person,
it's both.
It's a great thing for stimulating adaptations,
but you don't want it around too long.
And so we suggested that you not do ice baths
within probably six hours of any training
where the goal was hypertrophy or strength training.
There is some evidence that getting yourself
into an ice bath or cold shower after endurance training
can actually improve the mitochondrial aspects
of endurance exercise,
that you can get improvements in mitochondrial density
and you can get improvements in mitochondrial respiration
by doing that afterwards
and that it can facilitate recovery.
That's still a bit of a controversial area.
I do think that what I mentioned earlier,
that waiting at least six hours
and probably more like 24 hours between workouts
is a good idea that getting at least one full day of rest
each week, for some people that'll be two.
I have to say, I'm one of these people
that after two days of absolutely no exercise,
I do perform better consistently
across all aspects of physical performance
and mentally, I feel better as well.
Even though I loathe to take those days off,
unless I'm really exhausted,
it does seem to help my training.
Some people can train seven days a week and they're fine.
I think it just is, there's a lot of individual variation.
You want to work on sleep
and maximizing sleep for recovery, nutrition,
of course, as well.
I talked about sleep in the first four episodes
of the podcast.
If you have trouble with sleep,
definitely check out those episodes.
It's very clear and a number of sports teams,
even some folks that I work with and Andy Galpin and others
are starting to incorporate
a what's called a parasympathetic down regulation
after training of any kind as a way to accelerate recovery
and enable you to do more work.
In other words, get back to work out sooner.
What is parasympathetic down regulation?
It means finishing your training
and instead of just hopping on the phone
or hopping into your car
and heading off to take five minutes minimum,
maybe ideally more like 10 or 20,
but for sake of time, five minutes minimum
and doing just some slow, pure nasal,
long exhale devoted breathing
or lying down and just kind of zoning out.
That it seems can accelerate recovery
and allow you to get back into other types of work,
mental work or physical work more quickly,
which makes total sense
because remember your nervous system
and recovery and work is a local phenomenon.
Which muscles were you using?
Were you using your glutes, your hams and your back
or were you using your shoulders, et cetera?
But it's also a systemic thing.
It's also about those neurons in the locus coeruleus
that are releasing epinephrine.
You want to quiet all that down after training.
You want to really just zone out.
Think Costello, channel your inner Costello
and just mellow out for five to 20 minutes
and then move into the rest of your day.
Five minutes should be manageable
even if it's just sitting in the car with your eyes closed
doing that down regulation breathing.
I think you'll see big benefits
in terms of allowing yourself to come back sooner,
do more work over time
and just perform and feel better generally
as well as be able to think about other things
besides just how much the previous workout
kind of beat you up.
A couple more things I think are going to be useful
and I do want to just pack these in
because we are closing out the month on physical performance
and that's about programming and about pacing
and the kind of mental aspects of endurance.
So let's start with pacing and mental aspects of endurance.
I learned from a friend and colleague here at the podcast
that who's very active in triathlon and marathon
and another knows a lot about that whole world
and the competitive landscape there
that pacing and literally physical pacers
of a laser on the ground or visualizing
or having a pace car or a pace runner in front
is actually not allowed in many competitions.
And if those are present doesn't allow the race times
to qualify as legitimate record holding times.
And that's very interesting to me
because what we know is that the visual system
has this capacity to switch back and forth
between what we call panoramic vision
where we're not really focused on anything.
Things are just flowing past us
or our eyes are just kind of zoned out.
So I can do this right now and you won't be able to tell
but I'm looking at the corners of the room.
I see Costello down there on the floor.
I see my podcast team here and I can also see the microphone.
I can see myself in this environment.
That's panoramic vision.
Whereas if I draw my eyes to one location
like right there in the center of the camera
it's what's called a vergence eye movement.
So I'm contracting my visual window.
The contraction of the visual window when that's done
is the same thing that would happen
if I was tracking say a pace car or a pace runner
or a laser on the ground.
The mirror bringing our eyes together
to what we call a vergence point
has the impact of triggering the activation
of neural circuits in the thalamus.
Things like Zona and Serta
if you really want to know what their names are
of these brain areas as well as in the brainstem
that activate the so-called alertness system.
Things like locus coeruleus.
Whereas panoramic vision tends to bring us
into states of relaxation.
You can actually leverage this during your runs.
Let's say you're out for a long run
or you're swimming or you're cycling.
This is probably easiest to imagine out of the water
but you could probably do in the water as well.
If you focus your attention on a landmark
that you're going to run to,
you'll find that it's much easier than if you don't
actually have a set milestone or landmark
that you're going to run to.
However, if you were to continue that repeatedly
just going milestone after milestone after milestone
you would feel more mentally fatigued
and you would actually be able
to degenerate less work overall.
One thing that can be useful is focusing on a milestone,
running to that milestone or biking,
whatever it is the activity happens to be
and then dilating your field of view
to relax the system and then continuing again.
So it's this kind of active contraction
or of the visual window
and then dilation of the visual window.
Contraction of the visual window
allows you to generate more effort
but there's a cost to doing that
because neurons consume energy
and now you know how they do that.
Whereas dilation allows you
to essentially be more efficient, right?
Now pacing is not allowed or having a pacer, a visual pacer
because it does allow you to access systems
in the brain and body that allow you
to create more energy, more effort.
And so I find it interesting
that I think in a kind of subconscious genius
the race officials and the governing bodies
of these races have said, okay, sure,
having a pacer there or someone in front
you can draft off of them.
There's actually a kind of a aerodynamic effect
of having someone in front of you that makes it easier
to run in the wake of their air stream, so to speak.
Same is true in cycling.
This is why the cycling teams are so good
at maneuvering in packs in very specific ways.
You can go faster with less effort
if you're drafting as it's called behind somebody.
But as well, where you place your vision
will allow you to generate more effort.
And so it's interesting that they've taken out
this kind of, if you will, performance enhancing tool.
I imagine, and I have to imagine
it's the appropriate word here,
that good runners, good cyclists have the ability
to create a kind of pacer in their mind's eye.
I have to imagine that they're not just completely
allowing their attention to drift,
although they do that when they want to be
in highly efficient mode generating effort
without having to tax their mental capacity.
And remember mental capacity is neural energy
and consumes glucose, energy that they could devote
to the functioning of their body,
but that when needed that they can focus their energy in
and actually kind of chase a mental pacer or pick milestones.
So this is a mental game that you can play as well.
It's a little bit hard to do in the context
of weightlifting in the gym.
It's more of a moving through space kind of thing.
But some people do this by counting reps, et cetera.
I think it's especially suitable
for endurance type of exercise, especially done outside.
One of the reasons I hate running on a treadmill
is it just feels like it's never ending.
And I've never tried one of these Peloton things.
I try and avoid looking at screens as much
as I possibly can.
But if you try this next time you're out for a run or swim,
what you'll find is that you have a capacity
to engage a system of higher energy output
when you focus your eyes on a particular location,
but you want to use that judiciously
because your goal of course is to become efficient
at moving through space over time
and not taxing your brain and body to the point
where you arrive at the end of that,
unless it's race day, just completely tapped out.
So that's a kind of interesting aspect of running.
If you're a fan of running, which I am,
and you get the chance to look at any of the documentaries
or docudramas made about, excuse me,
about Steve Prefontaine,
it was clear that he was mostly in a battle with himself,
but that he was also a highly competitive individual.
And you'll see this in some of his races.
I do encourage you to look some of those up on YouTube
or see the docudramas.
They're quite good.
Where he ran the, essentially it was 12 laps on a track.
It's essentially the five, it is the 5,000 meter race,
which is essentially three miles.
And he essentially tried to sprint the whole thing,
which is ridiculous.
Actually knowing what you know today,
you'll realize that Steve Prefontaine basically was pulling
from strength, speed, power, muscular endurance,
long duration effort, high intensity, aerobic, anaerobic,
as he sort of tried to maximize every fuel system.
And you'll see that in the races that he runs,
but that when runners are nearing the final laps,
the so-called bell lap of a race,
they'll often look to one another to see where somebody is,
obviously to assess their progress and how close somebody is.
But when somebody gets past,
oftentimes you'll see someone access this mysterious kick,
this ability to tap into some additional gear
that allows them to run forward or faster
when they themselves actually thought
that they were maxed out.
So someone could be running for the finish line.
They're convinced they're going to win.
They're going max effort,
or at least they perceive max effort.
Someone passes them and all of a sudden,
max effort has changed.
Because of that visual target,
they are able to access higher levels of speed and output
and effort and performance.
They don't always catch up to that person and win,
but having a target, a milestone,
is a powerful way that we can generate more force
and energy in anything.
And the visual system is the way
that we bring those milestones into our brain,
which then brings about epinephrine,
which brings about neural firing,
which allows us to access whatever resources
happen to be available to us.
So I find this fascinating because people often wonder,
like, where does the kick come from?
Where is this kind of gift of an additional gear?
Where is that deeper resource?
And we often express it and talk about it
in kind of psychological terms like heart or willpower,
or that something kind of got transplanted into us
or descended into us,
and not to remove any of the spiritual aspects
of sport or running or effort or the human heart.
But it's very clear that the nervous system,
when it has a specific visual target,
can generate the sorts of intense effort
that it couldn't otherwise.
And it sometimes even comes as a surprise
to the person generating the effort.
I promised that I would talk about programming,
meaning when and how many times a week
to do the various workouts related to endurance
and how to merge those with other types of exercise
that you might be doing for strength or yoga
or other things that you might be doing,
like work and other things unrelated to exercise.
Since that's a vast space with many different parameters
and you all have different lives and lifestyles
and backgrounds with fitness, et cetera,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to put
three different levels, if you will,
or protocols that one could adopt
in a link on the show notes or in the caption on YouTube.
If you click on that link,
you'll be able to see three possible combinations
of endurance work, strength and hypertrophy work,
or endurance work, flexibility and hypertrophy work
that are grounded in many of the major publications
that Dr. Andy Galpin and colleagues and other people
have described, including this review
that's also linked there on concurrent training
and how one can use concurrent training,
meaning training for endurance, training for strength,
training for hypertrophy,
training for all these different things
without having to train constantly every day,
twice a day, et cetera.
So if you are interested in taking the protocols
that you learned about in this episode
and in previous episodes and combining those,
we've placed them there for you
as a completely zero cost resource.
Please understand they are not wholly,
Costello agrees they are not wholly.
There will be variation in terms of what people can tolerate
and what they have time for,
but I think they'll serve as a useful guideline
in getting started or in continuing with
and expanding on existing endurance work, strength work,
hypertrophy work, and so forth.
Just really quickly,
we didn't talk about supplements much today.
In the previous episodes,
I talked about the phosphocreatine system
and supplementing with creatine,
talked about beta alanine
for kind of moderate duration work.
Really the only things that have been shown
to really improve endurance work
across the four varieties of endurance work
I described today,
they have essentially two forms.
One are stimulants, so things like caffeine
will definitely improve endurance work
and power output.
There's a little bit of evidence that caffeine intake
can actually inhibit the function of the creatine system,
but it's just one study, but that's interesting.
If you want to read that study,
you can put caffeine into examine.com
and it will take you to that study.
Many people get sore after workouts,
in particular workouts that involve
a lot of eccentric loading
or workouts that are very novel
where they've kind of pushed it
instead of moving gradually, as I suggest,
into say high-intensity anaerobic endurance work
of three sets of 20 seconds on, 100 second rest.
Maybe you get over-ambitious and you do eight sets,
in which case you are extremely sore.
Certain forms of magnesium,
in particular magnesium malate, M-A-L-A-T-E,
have been shown to be useful for removing
or reducing the amount of delayed onset muscle soreness.
That form of magnesium is distinctly different
than the sorts of magnesium
that are good for getting us into sleep,
things like magnesium threonate and by glycinate.
And then there's this whole thing about beet powder
and beet juices and things that increase nitric oxide
and allow for more vasodilation
and therefore delivery of blood to muscle and neurons
and other tissues for long bouts of endurance work.
Some people like beet juice and the related compounds
that increase arginine and vasodilation.
Some people don't.
Some people don't feel good when they take those.
Some people also don't feel good
when they take beta-alanine
because it can give them this feeling
of kind of like itchy, creepy crawlies under the skin,
kind of the niacin phenomenon, the niacin flush.
Some people don't mind that
or some people don't experience that.
So when it comes to supplementation,
there's a lot of variety,
but magnesium malate has been shown to reduce soreness.
So sometimes that's good.
Cold and hot contrast therapy for soreness,
things of that sort.
But in general, we focused mainly today on behavioral tools.
You'll notice that all of the tools are accessible
without the need for lots of equipment.
So I didn't say you need a rower or you need a kettlebell,
though those will work.
And I hope I was able to illustrate for you
that endurance isn't just one thing.
It's not just the ability to go for long bouts of exercise
of different kinds, that there's also this mental component
because of the way that neurons work.
And also that there are these different forms of endurance,
of muscular endurance, where you're going to fail
because of the muscles and muscle energy utilization
and the nerves that innervate those muscles locally,
not because of a failure to bring in oxygen or blood.
Whereas long duration effort,
it's going to be more about being below your VO2 max
and your ability to be efficient for long bouts
of more than 12 minutes of exercise.
One set, as I say, of 12 minutes to maybe several hours.
I should just mention with long duration type work,
you could even imagine raking in the yard or mowing a lawn,
depending on how big that lawn is.
I used to have a job when I was a kid mowing lawns,
and I'll tell you,
we didn't have many neighbors with very big lawns,
but there are a few of them felt huge
because they were really convoluted.
And if you're pushing that mower,
and these were the old fashioned mowers,
not electric mowers, it's work.
That's also of the sort that we call
long duration endurance work.
High intensity training will tap into yet other fuel sources
and mechanisms as we learned today.
So if you are enjoying this podcast
and you're finding the information useful,
it would be great if you would subscribe
to the YouTube channel.
That really helps us quite a lot.
And if you like,
you can click the notifications button on YouTube as well.
That way you're sure to never miss an episode.
We always release episodes on Monday,
but we also sometimes release episodes in between Mondays.
So please do subscribe to the YouTube channel.
Please also give us feedback in the comment section
on the YouTube channel.
That's where you can tell us about topics
that you want to hear more about,
or if you have questions about a given episode
or content within an episode,
that's where you want to put that feedback.
If you're not already subscribing on Apple and Spotify
as well, please do that.
On Apple, you can give us up to a five star review.
We like to think that you would give us a five star review,
but you can also leave comments on Apple
about the podcast more generally.
And again, those are all zero cost ways
that you can really help support the podcast.
We do have a Patreon.
It is patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman
at patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman.
You can support the podcast at any level that you like.
Please also check out our sponsors
that we mentioned at the beginning of the podcast.
I know ad reads are not the first thing
that people want to hear when they're getting ready
to consume scientific information.
Please understand that the ads and the sponsors
allow us to bring the zero cost to consumer information
about science and science-related tools to everybody.
So if you have the means, check out the sponsors.
We only work with sponsors whose products
we really believe in and that I actually use
and really love.
There's no obligation, however,
and we do talk about supplements from time to time.
Again, no obligation to use supplements.
We also talk about behavioral tools,
but if you are interested in supplements,
please go to examine.com to evaluate those supplements
and their various effects if you're curious about that.
And we work with Thorne, T-H-O-R-N-E.
Thorne is a supplement manufacturer
that we believe has the highest levels of stringency
in terms of the quality of the supplements
and they are very precise and very stringent
about the amounts of each of those compounds
in the given supplements.
This is a huge problem elsewhere in the supplement industry.
Many brands don't include what they say they include
on the bottle.
This seems to show up every time people
test different brands, but Thorne continually tests out
with the highest levels of accuracy and stringency.
If you want to see the supplements that I take,
you can go to thorne.com slash the letter U slash Huberman.
And if you do that, you can see all the supplements
that I take, you can get 20% off any of those supplements
as well if you want to navigate into the main Thorne site
and you see a supplement that you're interested in,
you'll also get 20% off any of those supplements as well.
So that's thorne.com slash the letter U slash Huberman.
So we have both cost-free and other ways
to help support the podcast.
If you know people that might be interested in the podcast
and benefit from the information,
please recommend it to them, that really helps us.
If you're on Instagram, check us out at Huberman Lab.
If you're on Twitter, it's also Huberman Lab.
And please check out our new website,
which is HubermanLab.com.
There you can find all the episodes of all the podcasts
batched according to topic in every format,
YouTube, Apple, and Spotify, with links out to those.
It's searchable by keywords that you're interested in.
So sleep or exercise, weight, training, strength,
fat loss, et cetera.
And you can subscribe to our newsletter, The Neural Network,
which will allow you to get zero cost updates
about speaking events, about any book releases
or exciting things that I'm reading
that I think you would enjoy reading as well,
as well as protocols related to science
and some summary and important notes from the podcast.
And last but not least, on behalf of myself and Costello,
who's finally waking up for, oh no, he went back to sleep.
Thank you for your interest in science.
I'll see you in the next one.